# Source: https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system

---

[](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/finalfantasy/images/4/4d/Thundara_from_FFVI_Pixel_Remaster.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20220225231351) [](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/finalfantasy/images/4/4d/Thundara_from_FFVI_Pixel_Remaster.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20220225231351) [](/wiki/File:Thundara_from_FFVI_Pixel_Remaster.jpg)
Battle in _Final Fantasy VI_.
_[Final Fantasy VI](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI "Final Fantasy VI")_ has a turn based **[battle system](/wiki/Battle_system "Battle system")** based on [Active Time Battle](/wiki/Active_Time_Battle "Active Time Battle") (ATB). Players control up to four [party](/wiki/Party "Party") members who can act when their ATB gauge is full. At this point, a [menu](/wiki/Menu_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Menu \(Final Fantasy VI\)") opens for that party member to select from standard commands, a character-specific [ability](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_abilities "Final Fantasy VI abilities"), a variety of learned [magic spells](/wiki/Magic_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_command\) "Magic \(Final Fantasy VI command\)"), or summon an [esper](/wiki/Esper_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Esper \(Final Fantasy VI\)") from an equipped [magicite](/wiki/Magicite_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Magicite \(Final Fantasy VI\)"). Normal attacks in [critical condition](/wiki/Critical_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Critical \(Final Fantasy VI\)") have the chance to be [Desperation Attacks](/wiki/Desperation_Attack "Desperation Attack"), special character-specific attacks that deal immense damage. 
The player can customize their characters' [weapons](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_weapons "Final Fantasy VI weapons"), [armor](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_armor "Final Fantasy VI armor"), [relic](/wiki/Relic_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Relic \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), and magicite, making use of a number of set equipment slots available. The magicite controls not only the characters' summon, but also any magic spells they can learn with continued use, and any [stats](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_stats "Final Fantasy VI stats") gained on leveling up, though HP and MP are gained even without equipping a magicite. The two relic slots can also greatly affect a character's form and function, as they range from basic stat improvements to providing major support abilities to the character that can alter their playstyle. Beyond these customizations, a character's playstyle depends upon their built-in character ability and the equipment options available to them. 
The ATB system in _Final Fantasy VI_ is based on the combat system introduced in _[Final Fantasy IV](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_IV "Final Fantasy IV")_. It carries over some changes introduced in _[Final Fantasy V](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_V "Final Fantasy V")_ , namely the negligible wait time after inputting an ability, and the use of four party members rather than five. The Desperation Attacks introduced in _Final Fantasy VI_ serve as a precursor to the [limit breaks](/wiki/Limit_Break_\(ability\) "Limit Break \(ability\)") introduced in later games, starting in _[Final Fantasy VII](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VII "Final Fantasy VII")_ ; similarly, the battle formations introduced by _Final Fantasy VI_ were used in later games. Many of the character abilities introduced in _Final Fantasy VI_ were later re-used in other entries of the [_Final Fantasy_ series](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_series "Final Fantasy series"). 
## Contents
  * 1 Mechanics
    * 1.1 Overview
    * 1.2 Random encounters
    * 1.3 Formation
    * 1.4 Stats
    * 1.5 Elements
    * 1.6 Statuses
    * 1.7 Active Time Battle
    * 1.8 Battle rewards
  * 2 Party members
    * 2.1 Abilities
    * 2.2 Equipment
    * 2.3 Magicite
  * 3 Enemies
  * 4 Citations


## Mechanics[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=1 "Edit section: Mechanics")]
### Overview[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=2 "Edit section: Overview")]
_Final Fantasy VI_ uses the Active Time Battle system with up to four controllable party members at a time. Both the party members and the [enemies](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_enemies "Final Fantasy VI enemies") have an ATB gauge (with only the party member's gauges visible) and can act once their gauge is full. By default, the actions for party members are Attack (perform a basic physical attack, with a chance to perform a Desperation Attack when in critical health), Item (using an [item](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_items "Final Fantasy VI items") in the player's inventory), Defend (guarding to reduce physical damage until their next action), and Change (to change to the front or back [row](/wiki/Row "Row")). The player can also attempt to use Escape to flee from the battle, wherein individual party members leave at different times, if successful, receiving no rewards but ending the battle early. 
The battle system has either Active or Wait mode, where Wait is default. In Active mode, ATB continues to fill regardless of what is happening in-game. In Wait, time stops when the player is navigating sub-menus to select a specific action, such as a specific item upon selecting Item or a specific spell when using [Magic](/wiki/Magic_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_command\) "Magic \(Final Fantasy VI command\)"). The Active mode is optional for players who wish for an added [difficulty level](/wiki/Difficulty_level "Difficulty level"). 
The player arranges their party's formation in the menu, and determines each member's [row](/wiki/Row "Row"). Party members in the back row halve physical damage taken, but also deal 50% less physical damage than in the front row, aside from when equipping certain [long range](/wiki/Long_Range "Long Range") weapons, or using a character's special ability. Party members with access to ranged weapons or mostly rely on spellcasting may prefer to be in the back row, while those who use physical attacks often (such as with the [Black Belt](/wiki/Black_Belt_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Black Belt \(Final Fantasy VI\)") equipped) may prefer to remain in the front row. 
Battles begin normally as random encounters in certain fields, or in [boss](/wiki/Boss "Boss") battles that occur, normally during story beats. Depending on the [enemy formation](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_enemy_formations "Final Fantasy VI enemy formations"), chosen from a number of formations assigned to that field, a battle may occur in one of five attack formations: a normal formation (four party members face down enemies on the opposing side), preemptive attack (same as before, except the player's party begin with filled ATB gauges), back attack (where the party's row is reversed, and enemies attack first), surrounded (where two groups of enemies surround the party either side), and side attack (where the party is split in half, but surrounds the enemy). 
When a party member reaches 0 HP, they are [KO'd](/wiki/KO_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "KO \(Final Fantasy VI\)") until revived by an ability. If all party members are KO'd in an inescapable battle, it is [Game Over](/wiki/Game_Over_\(term\) "Game Over \(term\)"), and the player must return to a previous save. If the party loses a random battle, the game will not display a Game Over screen, but plays a short animation where the topmost party member rises from the ground, and the game will continue from the last activated save point. 
Standard attacks have a 1 in 32 chance of being a [critical hit](/wiki/Critical_hit "Critical hit"), doubling damage. Some weapons, such as the [Rune Blade](/wiki/Rune_Blade_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Rune Blade \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), [Ragnarok](/wiki/Ragnarok_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_weapon\) "Ragnarok \(Final Fantasy VI weapon\)"), [Lightbringer](/wiki/Lightbringer_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Lightbringer \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), [Final Trump](/wiki/Final_Trump_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Final Trump \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), consume [12..19] MP from the user upon attacking for an automatic critical hit. If these weapons have an [added spell](/wiki/Added_Ability#Final_Fantasy_VI "Added Ability"), it will deal a critical hit as well, despite spells normally being unable to do so.[1]
### Random encounters[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=3 "Edit section: Random encounters")]
See also: [Random encounter](/wiki/Random_encounter "Random encounter")
The game is divided into areas with different areas having different random enemy formations and encounter rates. The overworld has different assignments for [grasslands](/wiki/Grass "Grass"), [forests](/wiki/Forest "Forest"), [deserts](/wiki/Desert_\(location\) "Desert \(location\)") and wastelands. The [Veldt](/wiki/Veldt "Veldt"), [towns](/wiki/Town "Town"), and [dungeons](/wiki/Dungeon "Dungeon") also have their own assignments. 
While moving on the field, the game increments a "danger counter" and for each step, generates a random number between 0 and 255; if the number is less than [counter / 256], a random battle occurs.[1]
The following table lists the possible encounter rates/counter increments: 
Place  | Explanation  | Encounter rate  | 1/2 rate ([Ward Bangle](/wiki/Ward_Bangle_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Ward Bangle \(Final Fantasy VI\)"))  | 0 rate ([Molulu's Charm](/wiki/Molulu%27s_Charm_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Molulu's Charm \(Final Fantasy VI\)"))   
---|---|---|---|---  
[Overworld](/wiki/Overworld "Overworld") 1  | No encounters  | 0  | 0  | 0   
Overworld 2  | Decreased  | 96  | 48  | 0   
Overworld 3  | Normal  | 192  | 96  | 0   
Overworld 4  | Increased  | 384  | 192  | 0   
[Dungeon](/wiki/Dungeon "Dungeon") 1  | Decreased  | 64  | 32  | 0   
Dungeon 2  | Normal  | 112  | 56  | 0   
Dungeon 3  | Increased  | 352  | 176  | 0   
Dungeon 4  | Increased a lot (unused)  | 512  | 256  | 0   
After each battle, the counter is reset to 0. A simulation gives an average number of 23 steps before each encounter (smallest : 2, max 92). If the party member in lead has the [Ward Bangle](/wiki/Ward_Bangle_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Ward Bangle \(Final Fantasy VI\)") equipped, the number added is halved. If [Mog](/wiki/Mog_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Mog \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)") equips the [Molulu's Charm](/wiki/Molulu%27s_Charm_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Molulu's Charm \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), the counter will not increase, and no random encounters occur. 
Randomly encountered monsters appear in packs of either two or four [formations](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_enemy_formations "Final Fantasy VI enemy formations"), and the game randomly chooses which formation to launch. 4-packs are used when the party is on the overworld or inside a dungeon. 2-packs are used when the random encounter is event based: such as the attacking imperial troopers in the [Battle for the Frozen Esper](/wiki/Battle_for_the_Frozen_Esper "Battle for the Frozen Esper"). 
To determine which formation to launch from the pack, the game picks a random number [0..255] and compares it to the probabilities listed in the following table:[1]
Formation  | Explanation  | Range  | Percent   
---|---|---|---  
2-pack 1  | Common  | 0–191  | 75%   
2-pack 2  | Uncommon  | 192–255  | 25%   
4-pack 1  | Normal  | 0–79  | 31.25%   
4-pack 2  | Normal  | 80–159  | 31.25%   
4-pack 3  | Normal  | 160–239  | 31.25%   
4-pack 4  | Rare  | 240–255  | 6.25%   
The range in which the random number falls determines the monster formation. A notable exception to the rules above is the Veldt, which has its own custom monster group assignments. Another exception is the [Floating Continent](/wiki/Floating_Continent_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\)#Enemies "Floating Continent \(Final Fantasy VI\)") where there is one extra step in determining the formation: the game randomly picks a number [0..3] and increments the chosen formation number with the randomly generated number. In total, the Floating Continent uses 12 unique formations arranged into a grid of 4*4 different options. 
### Formation[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=4 "Edit section: Formation")]
[](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/finalfantasy/images/8/8a/FFVI_Back_Attack.png/revision/latest?cb=20101108061702) [](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/finalfantasy/images/8/8a/FFVI_Back_Attack.png/revision/latest?cb=20101108061702) [](/wiki/File:FFVI_Back_Attack.png)
Back attack.
See also: [Attack formations](/wiki/Attack_formations "Attack formations")
A random encounter's attack formation depends on which types are allowed in the area the battle takes place. If any character is equipped with an [Alarm Earring](/wiki/Alarm_Earring "Alarm Earring"), pincer and back attacks are disabled. The enemy formations each have a number of permitted battle formations; most formations allow all types, some disable surrounded attacks, but a few disable other types. Most boss battles disable all but normal attacks, while some other battles will always result in a surrounded or back attack. 
Surrounded and back attacks will never be preemptive strikes. For a normal attack, there is a 1/8 chance of a preemptive strike. Side attacks have a 7/32 chance of being a preemptive strike. If any character is equipped with a [Gale Hairpin](/wiki/Gale_Hairpin_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Gale Hairpin \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), the chances are doubled. Certain enemy formations (mostly bosses) disable preemptive strikes altogether. 
Due to the [pincer attack glitch](/wiki/Pincer_attack_glitch "Pincer attack glitch"), the row command still works in surrounded attacks, even if the battles have no rows. Another surrounded attack glitch has a single enemy "surrounding" the party in a surrounded attack, which should not be possible. 
If [Gau](/wiki/Gau_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Gau \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)") is learning a new [Rage](/wiki/Rage_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_command\) "Rage \(Final Fantasy VI command\)") on the Veldt, he will not return to the party in a side, back, or surrounded attack. 
The [Tyrannosaur](/wiki/Tyrannosaur_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Tyrannosaur \(Final Fantasy VI\)") enemy can back attack even with an Alarm Earring equipped. A fight with two Tyrannosaurs always results in a surrounded attack, Alarm Earring or not. 
[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Preemptive_Strike.png "FFVI Preemptive Strike.png \(9 KB\)")
Preemptive strike.
[](/wiki/File:FF6_Pincer_Attack.png "FF6 Pincer Attack.png \(7 KB\)")
Surrounded.
[](/wiki/File:FF6SideBattle.png "FF6SideBattle.png \(20 KB\)")
Side attack.
[](/wiki/File:Side-Attack-FFVI-iOS.png "Side-Attack-FFVI-iOS.png \(1.82 MB\)")
Side Attack (2014 mobile).
### Stats[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=5 "Edit section: Stats")]
Main article: [Final Fantasy VI stats](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_stats "Final Fantasy VI stats")
[](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/finalfantasy/images/c/c6/Status-Menu-FFVI-iOS.png/revision/latest?cb=20140601201106) [](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/finalfantasy/images/c/c6/Status-Menu-FFVI-iOS.png/revision/latest?cb=20140601201106) [](/wiki/File:Status-Menu-FFVI-iOS.png)
Character stats in the Status menu.
Party members and enemies each have a [level](/wiki/LV_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "LV \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), [HP](/wiki/HP_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "HP \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), [MP](/wiki/MP_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "MP \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), and a set of stats that determines their performance in battle. These stats are naturally improved by party members leveling up with [EXP](/wiki/EXP_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "EXP \(Final Fantasy VI\)"). Enemies' stats and levels are pre-determined. HP and MP refer to how much damage can be taken before being KO'd and how many spells can be cast, respectively. 
Each character has unique base stats that do not grow naturally, but the player can boost them once they gain access to magicite, as most confer a stat bonus to the character who levels up with that magicite equipped. Party members can also equip certain relics that boost stats. 
  * **[Strength](/wiki/Strength_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Strength \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** : Increases damage dealt by physical attacks, along with the Attack stat (see formula below). The stat is core to physical party members, and can be increased by relics and magicite. Enemies lack a Strength stat, but it is determined randomly at the start of battle.
  * **[Agility](/wiki/Agility_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Agility \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** : Determines the rate at which the ATB gauge fills. Unlike other party member stats, this stat is directly used and does not determine a derived stat. Enemies also have this stat, though it is hidden.
  * **[Stamina](/wiki/Stamina_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Stamina \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** : Determines HP-related effects, e.g. the chance to survive against [death](/wiki/Death_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Death \(Final Fantasy VI status\)") attacks, the amount they are healed by [regen](/wiki/Regen_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Regen \(Final Fantasy VI status\)"), the amount of damage dealt by [poison](/wiki/Poison_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Poison \(Final Fantasy VI status\)"), [sap](/wiki/Sap_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Sap \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), and [HP leak](/wiki/HP_Leak_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "HP Leak \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), and the amount of healing per step done by [Tintinnabulum](/wiki/Tintinnabulum_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Tintinnabulum \(Final Fantasy VI\)").
  * **[Magic](/wiki/Magic_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_stat\) "Magic \(Final Fantasy VI stat\)")** : Determines the amount of damage/healing done by magical abilities. It is multiplied with the user's level and the magic spell's power when determining damage in the following formula:  S p e l l P o w e r × 4 + ( L e v e l × M a g i c × S p e l l P o w e r / 32 ) {\displaystyle {Spell~Power} \times 4 + (Level \times Magic \times {Spell~Power} / 32)} . The stat is core to party members, and can be increased by relics, magicite, and equipment.
  * **[Attack](/wiki/Attack_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_stat\) "Attack \(Final Fantasy VI stat\)")** : Determines the damage dealt by physical attacks, along with Strength (see formula below). The stat is increased by equipment.
  * **[Defense](/wiki/Defense_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Defense \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** : Determines the resistance to physical attacks. It reduces physical damage in the following formula:  ( D a m a g e × ( 255 − D e f e n s e ) / 256 ) + 1 {\displaystyle (Damage \times (255 - Defense) / 256) + 1} . It is increased by armor.
  * **[Evasion](/wiki/Evasion_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Evasion \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** : Determines the chance to block a physical attack against the party member or enemy. It calculates the block value (chance to block an attack) in the formula:  B l o c k V a l u e = ( 255 − E v a s i o n × 2 ) + 1 {\displaystyle {Block Value} = (255 - Evasion \times 2) + 1} . It caps at 255 and the minimum value is 1. Evasion was bugged and did not work in the original [SNES](/wiki/Super_Nintendo_Entertainment_System "Super Nintendo Entertainment System") version, as Magic Evasion was used instead.
  * **[Magic Defense](/wiki/Magic_Defense_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Magic Defense \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** : Determines the resistance to magic attacks. Magic Defense has an identical formula to Defense, but for a different type of damage. It is increased by armor.
  * **[Magic Evasion](/wiki/Magic_Evasion_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Magic Evasion \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** : Determines the ability to block magic attacks, with an identical formula to the Evasion stat. In the original SNES version, this stat was used for all types of damage instead of only magic damage.
  * **[Hit Rate](/wiki/Hit_Rate_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Hit Rate \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** : Determines the chance that the user will land an attack, reducing their chance of missing. It is calculated in the following formula:  ( ( H i t R a t e × B l o c k V a l u e ) / 256 ) > [ 0..99 ] = H i t {\displaystyle ((Hit Rate \times BlockValue) / 256) > [0..99] = Hit}
  * **Escape Success** : A hidden stat for party members that determines their ability to flee from battle. It determines how quickly each character escapes individually.


The full formula for physical damage dealt by party members, taking into account Strength and Attack, is as follows:[1]
  1. S t r e n g t h 2 = S t r e n g t h × 2 {\displaystyle Strength2 = Strength \times 2} (caps at 128)
  2. A t t a c k 2 = A t t a c k + S t r e n g t h 2 {\displaystyle Attack2 = Attack + Strength2}
  3. If equipped with [Gauntlet](/wiki/Gauntlet_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Gauntlet \(Final Fantasy VI\)"),  A t t a c k 2 = A t t a c k 2 + B a t t l e P o w e r × 3 / 4 {\displaystyle Attack2 = Attack2 + Battle Power \times 3 / 4}
  4. D a m a g e = A t t a c k + ( ( L e v e l × L e v e l × A t t a c k 2 ) / 256 ) × 3 / 2 {\displaystyle Damage = Attack + ((Level \times Level \times Attack2) / 256) \times 3 / 2}
  5. If party member is equipped with a [Master's Scroll](/wiki/Master%27s_Scroll_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Master's Scroll \(Final Fantasy VI\)"):  D a m a g e = D a m a g e / 2 {\displaystyle Damage = Damage / 2}
  6. If the attack is a standard attack, and the party member is equipped with a [Genji Glove](/wiki/Genji_Glove_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Genji Glove \(Final Fantasy VI\)") but only one or no weapons:  D a m a g e = c e i l ( D a m a g e × 3 / 4 ) {\displaystyle Damage = ceil(Damage \times 3 / 4)}


The formula for physical damage dealt by monsters is  D a m a g e = L e v e l × L e v e l × ( A t t a c k × 4 + S t r e n g t h ) / 256 {\displaystyle Damage = Level \times Level \times (Attack \times 4 + Strength) / 256} . 
### Elements[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=6 "Edit section: Elements")]
Main article: [Final Fantasy VI elements](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_elements "Final Fantasy VI elements")
_Final Fantasy VI_ has a number of elements that can be applied to attacks (most often magic attacks). The element determines the damage an ability deals based on if the target is weak, resistant, immune to, or absorbs an element. Elemental affinity can be determined by equipment. 
If the element is nullified, or the target is immune to damage of that element, the attack will deal 0 damage. If the target absorbs the element, then they will gain HP instead of sustaining damage. If the target resists the element, it will deal half damage. If the target is weak to the element, its damage will be doubled. 
The eight elements are **[fire](/wiki/Fire_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_element\) "Fire \(Final Fantasy VI element\)")** , **[ice](/wiki/Ice_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Ice \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** , **[lightning](/wiki/Lightning_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Lightning \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** , **[earth](/wiki/Earth_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Earth \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** , **[wind](/wiki/Wind_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Wind \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** , **[water](/wiki/Water_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Water \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** , **[poison](/wiki/Poison_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_element\) "Poison \(Final Fantasy VI element\)")** , and **[holy](/wiki/Holy_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Holy \(Final Fantasy VI\)")**. 
### Statuses[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=7 "Edit section: Statuses")]
Main article: [Final Fantasy VI statuses](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_statuses "Final Fantasy VI statuses")
Party members and enemies can be afflicted with certain status effects by abilities. These statuses can have either positive or negative effects, depending on the status in question. Enemies can be immune to certain statuses, and certain relics can grant party members with the same immunity. The [Esuna](/wiki/Esuna_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Esuna \(Final Fantasy VI\)") spell, the [Remedy](/wiki/Remedy_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Remedy \(Final Fantasy VI\)") item, and the esper [Unicorn](/wiki/Unicorn_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Unicorn \(Final Fantasy VI\)") can be used to remove negative statuses, while [Dispel](/wiki/Dispel_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Dispel \(Final Fantasy VI\)") can be used to remove positive ones. 
The regular status effects are as follows: 
  * **[KO](/wiki/KO_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "KO \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** , when a party member's HP reaches 0.
  * **[Petrify](/wiki/Petrify_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Petrify \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** flags a target as defeated (similar to KO) unless cured before the battle ends.
  * **[Imp](/wiki/Imp_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Imp \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** disables most abilities, including all magic aside from the [Imp spell](/wiki/Imp_\(ability\) "Imp \(ability\)") spell (which heals the status), and reduces Attack and Defense to 1 (aside from some equipment).
  * **[Invisible](/wiki/Invisible_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Invisible \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** makes all physical attacks against the target miss, but magic attacks will hit. In the SNES version, this could be used with the [Vanish-Doom bug](/wiki/Vanish-Doom_bug "Vanish-Doom bug") to kill any enemy.
  * **[Magitek](/wiki/Magitek_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Magitek \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** , a rare status granted to party members during some story beats, grants the [Magitek command](/wiki/Magitek_\(command\) "Magitek \(command\)") to the party member.
  * **[Poison](/wiki/Poison_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Poison \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** causes a target to take [poison-elemental](/wiki/Poison_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_element\) "Poison \(Final Fantasy VI element\)") damage each turn (and causes party members to take 1/32 HP damage each step when outside of battle). The amount of damage taken increases each turn until cured.
  * **[Zombie](/wiki/Zombie_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Zombie \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** causes a character to become uncontrollable, attacking either allies or enemies, and is classed as KO'd in Game Over terms.
  * **[Darkness](/wiki/Darkness_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Darkness \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** halves the target's hit rate. In the SNES release, the [Evade bug](/wiki/Evade_bug "Evade bug") makes the status's changes to hit rate irrelevant.
  * **[Sleep](/wiki/Sleep_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Sleep \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** stops the target's ATB gauge and prevents them from acting or evading, until they are hit with a physical attack or the status is otherwise cured.
  * **[Sap](/wiki/Sap_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Sap \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** causes the target to take damage over time.
  * **[Confuse](/wiki/Confuse_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Confuse \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** causes the target to attack its own allies uncontrollably (though some abilities will never be used when confused).
  * **[Berserk](/wiki/Berserk_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Berserk \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** increases the target's physical damage by +50%, but makes them attack enemies uncontrollably. This can be desired in some circumstances.
  * **[Silence](/wiki/Silence_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Silence \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** prevents a target from using the commands Magic, [Dualcast](/wiki/Dualcast_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Dualcast \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), or [Lore](/wiki/Lore_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Lore \(Final Fantasy VI\)").
  * **[Image](/wiki/Image_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Image \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** causes a target to evade all physical attacks, though each physical attack against the target has a 25% chance to remove the status.
  * **[Critical](/wiki/Critical_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Critical \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** , when a party member is on critically low HP. This gives the party member a small chance of using their Desperation Attack instead of a normal attack, and can trigger some equipment special effects.
  * **[Doom](/wiki/Doom_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Doom \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** places a timer over a target's head to inflict KO when the target expires.
  * **[Reflect](/wiki/Reflect_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Reflect \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** bounces most magic attacks made against the party against the opposing group (meaning spells against them will hit the enemy instead). This both affects Attack spells, but also some Healing and Effect spells.
  * **[Protect](/wiki/Protect_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Protect \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** reduces physical damage taken by the target by approximately 1/3.
  * **[Shell](/wiki/Shell_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Shell \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** reduces magic damage taken by the target by approximately 1/3.
  * **[Stop](/wiki/Stop_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Stop \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** freezes a target's ATB gauge, prevents them from acting or evading attacks, and pauses the timer on most status effects.
  * **[Haste](/wiki/Haste_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Haste \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** causes the target's ATB gauge to fill almost 1/3 faster, but also speeds time for most statuses.
  * **[Slow](/wiki/Slow_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Slow \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** halves the speed the target's ATB gauge fills.
  * **[Regen](/wiki/Regen_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Regen \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** causes the target to regenerate HP over time, dependent on the Stamina stat.
  * **[Float](/wiki/Float_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Float \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** causes all earth-elemental attacks against the target to miss.
  * **[Reraise](/wiki/Reraise_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Reraise \(Final Fantasy VI status\)")** causes a party member to be instantly revived with the [Raise](/wiki/Raise_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Raise \(Final Fantasy VI\)") spell upon hitting KO.
  * **[Frozen](/wiki/Frozen_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Frozen \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** freezes a target's ATB gauge and prevents them from acting or evading attacks.


A few specialized statuses, such as those based on specific character abilities, affect the battle in other ways. 
### Active Time Battle[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=8 "Edit section: Active Time Battle")]
In battle, party members and enemies each have an [ATB](/wiki/Active_Time_Battle "Active Time Battle") gauge which, once full, allows them to act. The speed stat determines the rate at which the gauge builds, while other statuses affect it (the [Haste status](/wiki/Haste_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Haste \(Final Fantasy VI status\)") expedites it to 1.5x speed, and [Slow](/wiki/Slow_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_status\) "Slow \(Final Fantasy VI status\)") halves it to x0.5). 
After inputting a party member's action, a small wait on the ability is taken while an ability is charged. The wait is calculated as:[1]
     Wait time = 255 × Ability's wait counter {\displaystyle {\text{Wait time}}=255\times {\text{Ability's wait counter}}}
As these counters are typically between 0 and 10, the wait times are negligible. [Jump](/wiki/Jump_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Jump \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), [Rage](/wiki/Rage_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_command\) "Rage \(Final Fantasy VI command\)"), and [counterattacks](/wiki/Counter_\(status\)#Final_Fantasy_VI "Counter \(status\)") have no delay, whereas [Dualcast](/wiki/Dualcast_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Dualcast \(Final Fantasy VI\)") has the longest delay. 
### Battle rewards[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=9 "Edit section: Battle rewards")]
See also: [Battle Results](/wiki/Battle_Results "Battle Results") or [Item drop](/wiki/Item_drop "Item drop")
After defeating all enemies in a battle, the party earns rewards, including [EXP](/wiki/Experience_Points "Experience Points"), [gil](/wiki/Gil "Gil"), any item drops, and [AP](/wiki/Ability_Points "Ability Points"). EXP is used for increasing the characters' level, and is shared across all party members, while AP is used for learning spells from equipped magicite, where different magicite teach spells at different rates (some teach the same spell faster than others). If a party member levels up, the equipped magicite may provide additional stat bonuses. 
For item drops, each enemy has a slot for a common drop and a rare drop (1/8 or 12.5% chance). Some enemies have both; the game first checks the chance for a rare drop, and if the drop is not rare, the normal drop is given instead. Most enemies have only a rare drop, and thus, will drop nothing 87.5% of the time. Enemies defeated with [Banish](/wiki/Banish_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Banish \(Final Fantasy VI\)") will not drop anything. 
Enemies can drop all kinds of spoils from recovery items, throw items, weapons, armor, and relics. Some, such as the [Celestriad](/wiki/Celestriad_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Celestriad \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), are exceptionally [rare](/wiki/Very_rare_items "Very rare items") and valuable. Separately from item drops, the [Steal](/wiki/Steal_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Steal \(Final Fantasy VI\)") and [Metamorphose](/wiki/Metamorphose_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Metamorphose \(Final Fantasy VI\)") commands also grant the ability to obtain rare items from enemies, neither of which affect item drop mechanics. 
## Party members[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=10 "Edit section: Party members")]
  * **[Terra](/wiki/Terra_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Terra \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Magitek Elite. She learns magic spells by leveling up and has access to the [Trance](/wiki/Trance_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Trance \(Final Fantasy VI\)") ability, which temporarily doubles all damage dealt while halving magic damage taken. Terra has access to a wide variety of weapons and equipment, including most swords and all [female-exclusive equipment](/wiki/Female-exclusive_equipment "Female-exclusive equipment"). This makes her an excellent spellcaster but also a strong physical fighter . Though she has great versatility, Trance gears her more toward an offensive role.
  * **[Locke](/wiki/Locke_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Locke \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Adventurer. He has access to the [Steal](/wiki/Steal_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Steal \(Final Fantasy VI\)") ability (upgradeable with relics) and a variety of weapons and equipment, including swords. This makes him a potent physical fighter, and Steal makes him an invaluable asset in many battles.
  * **[Edgar](/wiki/Edgar_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Edgar \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Machinist. He has access to his [Tools](/wiki/Tools_\(command\) "Tools \(command\)") skillset coming with a variety of tools that each have strong strategic uses. He can wield almost all possible weapons. Tools make Edgar extremely powerful with little equipment, while his equipment options allow him to be geared effectively to many physical fighter roles.
  * **[Sabin](/wiki/Sabin_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Sabin \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Monk. He has access to his [Blitz](/wiki/Blitz_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Blitz \(Final Fantasy VI\)") skillset that gives him a number of powerful (mostly magic-based) attacks, but which must be input by the player using button combinations to perform the attacks. In the hands of a player who can use these abilities on command, Sabin is extremely formidable.
  * **[Cyan](/wiki/Cyan_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Cyan \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Samurai. He has access to the [Bushido](/wiki/Bushido_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Bushido \(Final Fantasy VI\)") command, which can have a variety of powerful effects depending on how long it is charged for. Cyan's Bushido can be unwieldy in versions of the game prior to the 2014 release, but in most cases he is a competent physical fighter.
  * **[Gau](/wiki/Gau_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Gau \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Feral Youth. He has access to the [Rage](/wiki/Rage_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_command\) "Rage \(Final Fantasy VI command\)") command, which allows him to take on the properties of certain previously fought enemies—taking on their elemental affinities, status resistances, and special abilities—but makes him uncontrollable. If played correctly and strategically, Gau is a versatile character who can be effective in nearly any role.
  * **[Celes](/wiki/Celes_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Celes \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Rune Knight. She has access to the [Runic](/wiki/Runic_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Runic \(Final Fantasy VI\)") command, which absorbs the next spell cast. Like Terra, Celes learns magic spells by leveling up. She also has access to the same equipment as Terra, making her a more defensive and equally very powerful and versatile option, where she can similarly fill any role.
  * **[Setzer](/wiki/Setzer_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Setzer \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Gambler. He has access to the [Slot](/wiki/Slot_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Slot \(Final Fantasy VI\)") command (which can be changed to [Gil Toss](/wiki/Gil_Toss_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Gil Toss \(Final Fantasy VI\)") with a relic), which has a variety of effects in battle and is potentially very potent. Setzer also has a unique set of equipment, making him a more ranged attacker. His most unique is [Fixed Dice](/wiki/Fixed_Dice_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Fixed Dice \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), which performs random but potentially devastating damage to an enemy.
  * **[Strago](/wiki/Strago_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Strago \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Blue Mage. He has access to the [Lore](/wiki/Lore_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Lore \(Final Fantasy VI\)") skillset, allowing him to use abilities learned from enemies after he sees the enemy perform them. Strago is geared toward spellcasting, and his Lores can have a variety of potent strategic effects, though his lack of female-exclusive equipment puts him at a slight disadvantage.
  * **[Relm](/wiki/Relm_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Relm \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Pictomancer. She has access to [Sketch](/wiki/Sketch "Sketch") (upgraded to [Control](/wiki/Control_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Control \(Final Fantasy VI\)") with a relic), allowing her to use an enemy's attacks on itself. Relm has the highest Magic stat and has access to female-exclusive equipment that make her potentially the most powerful spellcaster, although unlike Terra or Celes, she is locked into this role due to her equipment selection.


A few party members are optional: 
  * **[Shadow](/wiki/Shadow_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Shadow \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Assassin. He has access to the [Throw](/wiki/Throw_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Throw \(Final Fantasy VI\)") command, allowing him to throw weapons, as well as shurikens, at enemies. More notably, his dog [Interceptor](/wiki/Interceptor_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Interceptor \(Final Fantasy VI\)") allows him to dodge an attack only for Interceptor to respond with more powerful damage.
  * **[Mog](/wiki/Mog_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Mog \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Moogle. He has access to [Dance](/wiki/Dance_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Dance \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), which allows him to induce a variety of effects depending on the terrain. He is one of two party members, along with Edgar, to have access to spears, giving him a variety of options in battle with associated relics.
  * **[Gogo](/wiki/Gogo_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Gogo \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job Mime. As well as having access to the [Mimic](/wiki/Mimic_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Mimic \(Final Fantasy VI\)") command—which repeats the last action used by the player at no cost—they can also equip the commands and skillsets of other party members, making them extremely versatile. Gogo's limited stats and equipment in comparison mean they will not completely substitute their role, but Gogo can fit into any team.
  * **[Umaro](/wiki/Umaro_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Umaro \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")** , with the job class Berserker. Umaro is in a permanent berserk state, and all he will do is uncontrollably attack enemies, albeit for very high physical damage. Though a small number of equipment options are available to him, his uncontrollable nature and limited skillset mean Umaro is typically best used for the [Dragon's Neck Coliseum](/wiki/Dragon%27s_Neck_Coliseum "Dragon's Neck Coliseum") or simply for players who do not wish to control four party members at once.


In addition, some temporary party members join: 
  * **[Biggs and Wedge (Final Fantasy VI)](/wiki/Biggs_and_Wedge_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Biggs and Wedge \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** : Briefly controlled, and both with the [Magitek](/wiki/Magitek_\(command\) "Magitek \(command\)") command.
  * **[Ten Moogles](/wiki/Ten_Moogles "Ten Moogles")** : Various characters with different abilities and equipment. Mog is among them.
  * **[Banon](/wiki/Banon "Banon")** : Briefly controlled, and possessing the [Pray](/wiki/Pray_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Pray \(Final Fantasy VI\)") ability, which provides a free heal to the party.
  * **[Ghost](/wiki/Ghost_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_character\) "Ghost \(Final Fantasy VI character\)")** : Optionally recruited in the [Phantom Train](/wiki/Phantom_Train_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Phantom Train \(Final Fantasy VI\)"). Limited in its ability, but can use [Possess](/wiki/Possess_\(command\) "Possess \(command\)") to instantly defeat an enemy, sacrificing itself.
  * **[Leo](/wiki/Leo_Cristophe "Leo Cristophe")** : Briefly controlled, and providing the [Shock](/wiki/Shock_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Shock \(Final Fantasy VI\)") ability, which deals heavy damage to a target.
  * **[Maduin](/wiki/Maduin_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Maduin \(Final Fantasy VI\)")** : Controlled only on the field.


[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Terra_Branford_Sprite.png "FFVI Terra Branford Sprite.png \(871 bytes\)")
**[Terra](/wiki/Terra_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Terra \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Locke_Cole_Sprite_iOS.png "FFVI Locke Cole Sprite iOS.png \(777 bytes\)")
**[Locke](/wiki/Locke_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Locke \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Edgar_Roni_Figaro_Sprite_iOS.png "FFVI Edgar Roni Figaro Sprite iOS.png \(888 bytes\)")
**[Edgar](/wiki/Edgar_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Edgar \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Sabin_Sprite_iOS.png "FFVI Sabin Sprite iOS.png \(870 bytes\)")
**[Sabin](/wiki/Sabin_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Sabin \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Cyan_Garamonde_Sprite_iOS.png "FFVI Cyan Garamonde Sprite iOS.png \(806 bytes\)")
**[Cyan](/wiki/Cyan_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Cyan \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Gau_Sprite_iOS.png "FFVI Gau Sprite iOS.png \(763 bytes\)")
**[Gau](/wiki/Gau_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Gau \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Celes_Chere_Sprite_iOS.png "FFVI Celes Chere Sprite iOS.png \(884 bytes\)")
**[Celes](/wiki/Celes_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Celes \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Setzer_Gabbiani_Sprite_iOS.png "FFVI Setzer Gabbiani Sprite iOS.png \(913 bytes\)")
**[Setzer](/wiki/Setzer_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Setzer \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FF6_Strago_Sprite_iOS.png "FF6 Strago Sprite iOS.png \(808 bytes\)")
**[Strago](/wiki/Strago_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Strago \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FF6_Relm_Sprite_iOS.png "FF6 Relm Sprite iOS.png \(861 bytes\)")
**[Relm](/wiki/Relm_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Relm \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Shadow_Sprite_iOS.png "FFVI Shadow Sprite iOS.png \(790 bytes\)")
**[Shadow](/wiki/Shadow_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Shadow \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FF6_Mog_Sprite_iOS.png "FF6 Mog Sprite iOS.png \(596 bytes\)")
**[Mog](/wiki/Mog_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Mog \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FF6_Gogo_Sprite_iOS.png "FF6 Gogo Sprite iOS.png \(884 bytes\)")
**[Gogo](/wiki/Gogo_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Gogo \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FF6_Umaro_Sprite_iOS.png "FF6 Umaro Sprite iOS.png \(824 bytes\)")
**[Umaro](/wiki/Umaro_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_party_member\) "Umaro \(Final Fantasy VI party member\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:Imperial_Riding_Magitek_Armor_from_FFVI_iOS.png "Imperial Riding Magitek Armor from FFVI iOS.png \(3 KB\)")
**[Biggs and Wedge](/wiki/Biggs_and_Wedge_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Biggs and Wedge \(Final Fantasy VI\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Banon_Sprite_iOS.png "FFVI Banon Sprite iOS.png \(1 KB\)")
**[Banon](/wiki/Banon "Banon")**.
[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Ghost_Sprite_iOS.png "FFVI Ghost Sprite iOS.png \(1 KB\)")
**[Ghost](/wiki/Ghost_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_character\) "Ghost \(Final Fantasy VI character\)")**.
[](/wiki/File:FFVI_Leo_Cristophe_Sprite.png "FFVI Leo Cristophe Sprite.png \(1 KB\)")
**[Leo](/wiki/Leo_Cristophe "Leo Cristophe")**.
[](/wiki/File:Maduin_ff6_iOS.png "Maduin ff6 iOS.png \(1 KB\)")
**[Maduin](/wiki/Maduin_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Maduin \(Final Fantasy VI\)")**.
### Abilities[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=11 "Edit section: Abilities")]
Main article: [Final Fantasy VI abilities](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_abilities "Final Fantasy VI abilities")
[](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/finalfantasy/images/b/b3/Runic_from_FFVI_Pixel_Remaster.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20220303223412)
[](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/finalfantasy/images/9/98/Trance_from_FFVI_Pixel_Remaster.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20220303223415)
Celes using her Runic ability (top), and Terra using her Trance ability (bottom).
Party members by default have the Attack, Item, Defend, and Row abilities. Party members who have learned magic spells from relevant magicite, or innately through leveling up (in the case of Terra and Celes), also have access to the [Magic command](/wiki/Magic_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_command\) "Magic \(Final Fantasy VI command\)") to use any permanently learned spells. An equipped magicite will also provide the [Summon](/wiki/Summon_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Summon \(Final Fantasy VI\)") command and allow them to summon the magicite's esper into battle. 
Each party member also has a unique command, which may be a simple ability in itself or a skillset of abilities they can obtain throughout the game. The command, along with their equipment selection and stats, is what gives a party member their specific function in battle and determines their playstyle. For instance, Sabin's Blitz command gives him a skillset of mostly magic-based attacks, meaning he should be geared toward boosting his Magic stat; conversely, Cyan's Bushido command gives him mostly physical-based attacks, meaning he should be geared toward boosting his Strength stat. 
Each character also has unique Desperation Attacks, a more powerful version of their basic attack. Because these attacks are only rarely used by party members in critical condition, many players may never see these. 
### Equipment[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=12 "Edit section: Equipment")]
Main articles: [Final Fantasy VI weapons](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_weapons "Final Fantasy VI weapons"), [Final Fantasy VI armor](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_armor "Final Fantasy VI armor"), or [Relic (Final Fantasy VI)](/wiki/Relic_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Relic \(Final Fantasy VI\)")
[](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/finalfantasy/images/6/6e/Equipment_menu_from_FFVI_Pixel_Remaster.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20220303223710) [](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/finalfantasy/images/6/6e/Equipment_menu_from_FFVI_Pixel_Remaster.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20220303223710) [](/wiki/File:Equipment_menu_from_FFVI_Pixel_Remaster.jpg)
Locke's equipment menu.
Party members have a total of six slots: two hands, headgear, clothes, and two relics. Party members have an innate list of possible equipment they can wield. Pieces of equipment are acquired throughout the game from shops, enemy drops, treasures, or rewards for certain quests. 
The two hands are by default used for a sword and shield, though the [Genji Glove](/wiki/Genji_Glove_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Genji Glove \(Final Fantasy VI\)") allows a party member to equip weapons in both hands. Most weapons simply boost a character's stats (either their Attack stat to boost physical damage, or their Magic stat to boost spellcasting prowess), while some have unique abilities that make them more potent and affect a character's playstyle (such as [Ultima Weapon](/wiki/Ultima_Weapon_\(Final_Fantasy_VI_weapon\) "Ultima Weapon \(Final Fantasy VI weapon\)"), which deals more damage based on the wielder's HP, or [Organyx](/wiki/Organyx_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Organyx \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), which consumes MP to always deal critical hits). Shields boost a character's Evasion or Magic Evasion stats, improving their ability to block attacks. 
The headpiece and clothes are basic armor that improve a character's stats, specifically defensive stats. A few of these also grant the ability to absorb certain elements, and some rare armor pieces teach spells with AP the same way magic would. 
The two relics have the greatest impact on a character's playstyle. Some relics have basic effects, such as stat increases or resistances to certain statuses. Others can upgrade or otherwise change a character ability (such as, [Fake Moustache](/wiki/Fake_Moustache_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Fake Moustache \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), which changes Relm's Sketch to Control), grant entirely new command abilities (such as [Dragon Horn](/wiki/Dragon_Horn_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Dragon Horn \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), which changes Attack into [Jump](/wiki/Jump_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Jump \(Final Fantasy VI\)")), grant unique support abilities (such as [Black Belt](/wiki/Black_Belt_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Black Belt \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), which allows a character to [counterattack](/wiki/Counter_\(ability\) "Counter \(ability\)")), or other effects that potentially define a character's playstyle (such as [Celestriad](/wiki/Celestriad_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Celestriad \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), reducing MP costs of spells to 1). A combination of relics can be used to devastating effects, such as the Genji Glove—allowing two weapons to be equipped at once—and the [Master's Scroll](/wiki/Master%27s_Scroll_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Master's Scroll \(Final Fantasy VI\)")—causing the Attack command to hit four times against a random enemy. 
### Magicite[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=13 "Edit section: Magicite")]
Main article: [Magicite (Final Fantasy VI)](/wiki/Magicite_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Magicite \(Final Fantasy VI\)")
[](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/finalfantasy/images/9/97/Tri_Disaster_from_FFVI_Pixel_Remaster.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20220301194955)
[](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/finalfantasy/images/6/64/Esper_bonus_from_FFVI_Pixel_Remaster.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20220303224111)
Terra summoning the Valigarmanda esper in battle (top) and receiving its magicite's stat bonus upon leveling up (bottom).
Each character can equip a magicite piece, associated with an [esper](/wiki/Esper_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Esper \(Final Fantasy VI\)"), and obtained at different points the story. Magicite serve three major roles: teaching spells, granting stat increases on level up, and granting an esper to summon. The esper summoning is often the least-used component, as—aside from some exceptions (such as [Metamorphose](/wiki/Metamorphose_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Metamorphose \(Final Fantasy VI\)"))—their effects are basic attacks. 
The main role of magicite is to teach spells permanently to party members. A party member equipping a magicite has access to its spells, and the spells are taught by different magicite at different rates. The AP dropped after a battle will be multiplied by the spell's multiplier on the magicite, and when a spell reaches 100 AP, the spell is learned permanently. For instance, the [Phoenix](/wiki/Phoenix_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Phoenix \(Final Fantasy VI\)") magicite teaches [Raise](/wiki/Raise_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Raise \(Final Fantasy VI\)") spell at a x10 modifier, meaning only 10 AP needs to be gained with Phoenix equipped to learn Raise permanently; conversely, the [Bismarck](/wiki/Bismarck_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Bismarck \(Final Fantasy VI\)") magicite teaches the spell at only a x2 modifier, meaning 50 AP needs to be gained with Bismarck equipped to learn Raise. 
A major role for magicite is the stats taught by them on leveling up. When a character levels up through EXP, as well as gaining the boosts they were due to receive at that level, they will also gain increased stats provided by the magicite. For example, if Terra levels from 30 to 31 with [Valigarmanda](/wiki/Valigarmanda_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Valigarmanda \(Final Fantasy VI\)") (with a +2 Magic stat provided) equipped, she will also gain +2 Magic at that level. This means that party members should always level up with a magicite equipped to provide a boost to the stat they most benefit from (namely whichever their command can take advantage of). It is not worthwhile to [level-grind](/wiki/Level_grinding "Level grinding") before the magicite system becomes available. 
## Enemies[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=14 "Edit section: Enemies")]
Main articles: [Final Fantasy VI enemies](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_enemies "Final Fantasy VI enemies") or [Final Fantasy VI enemy formations](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_enemy_formations "Final Fantasy VI enemy formations")
When a battle begins, a group of enemies is fought from the selected enemy formation for that encounter. 
Enemies each have a set of stats that determine the damage they deal and receive. In addition, enemies have elemental properties including resistances, weaknesses, and immunities, as well as possible immunities to many status effects. Enemies also have items that can be dropped, stolen, or earned from morphing them. Gau can make use of enemies' battle scripts by leaping into them on the Veldt. 
## Citations[[](https://finalfantasy.fandom.com/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_battle_system?veaction=edit&section=15 "Edit section: Citations")]
  1. ↑ 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 Terii senshi (2009). _[Final Fantasy VI – Algorithms FAQ](https://gamefaqs.gamespot.com/ps/562865-final-fantasy-vi/faqs/13573)_. GameFAQs. 


[Final Fantasy VI](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI "Final Fantasy VI")
| Content|  [Allusions](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_allusions "Final Fantasy VI allusions") \- [Artwork](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_concept_art "Final Fantasy VI concept art") \- [Dummied content](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_dummied_content "Final Fantasy VI dummied content") \- [Merchandise](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_merchandise "Final Fantasy VI merchandise") \- [Script](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_SNES_script "Final Fantasy VI SNES script") \- [Timeline](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_timeline "Final Fantasy VI timeline") \- [Translations](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_translations "Final Fantasy VI translations") \- [Version differences](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_version_differences "Final Fantasy VI version differences") \- [Walkthroughs](/wiki/Walkthrough:Final_Fantasy_VI "Walkthrough:Final Fantasy VI")  
---|---  
Gameplay| Features|  [Characters](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_characters "Final Fantasy VI characters") \- [Locations](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_locations "Final Fantasy VI locations") \- [Menu](/wiki/Menu_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Menu \(Final Fantasy VI\)")  
Inventory|  [Armor](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_armor "Final Fantasy VI armor") \- [Items](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_items "Final Fantasy VI items") \- [Magicite](/wiki/Magicite_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Magicite \(Final Fantasy VI\)") \- [Relics](/wiki/Relic_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Relic \(Final Fantasy VI\)") \- [Weapons](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_weapons "Final Fantasy VI weapons")  
Mechanics|  [Abilities](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_abilities "Final Fantasy VI abilities") ([Command abilities](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_command_abilities "Final Fantasy VI command abilities") \- [Support abilities](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_support_abilities "Final Fantasy VI support abilities")) - [Elements](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_elements "Final Fantasy VI elements") \- [Espers](/wiki/Esper_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Esper \(Final Fantasy VI\)") \- [Stats](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_stats "Final Fantasy VI stats") \- [Statuses](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_statuses "Final Fantasy VI statuses")  
Enemies|  [Bestiary](/wiki/Bestiary_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Bestiary \(Final Fantasy VI\)") \- [Enemies](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_enemies "Final Fantasy VI enemies") \- [Enemy abilities](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_enemy_abilities "Final Fantasy VI enemy abilities") \- [Enemy formations](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_enemy_formations "Final Fantasy VI enemy formations")  
Other|  [Achievements](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_achievements "Final Fantasy VI achievements") \- [Album](/wiki/Album "Album") \- [Bonus](/wiki/Bonus_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Bonus \(Final Fantasy VI\)") \- [Bugs and glitches](/wiki/Category:Bugs_in_Final_Fantasy_VI "Category:Bugs in Final Fantasy VI") \- [Coliseum flowcharts](/wiki/Dragon%27s_Neck_Coliseum/Flowcharts "Dragon's Neck Coliseum/Flowcharts") \- [Item farming](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_items/Item_farming "Final Fantasy VI items/Item farming") \- [SNES game script](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_SNES_script "Final Fantasy VI SNES script")  
Media| Related releases|  [Final Fantasy VI: The Interactive CG Game](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI:_The_Interactive_CG_Game "Final Fantasy VI: The Interactive CG Game")  
Music albums|  _[Original Soundtrack](/wiki/Original_soundtracks_of_Final_Fantasy_VI "Original soundtracks of Final Fantasy VI")_ \- _[Grand Finale](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI:_Grand_Finale "Final Fantasy VI: Grand Finale")_ \- _[Piano Collections](/wiki/Piano_Collections:_Final_Fantasy_VI "Piano Collections: Final Fantasy VI")_ \- _[Kefka's Domain](/wiki/Original_soundtracks_of_Final_Fantasy_VI#Kefka's_Domain "Original soundtracks of Final Fantasy VI")_ \- _[Special Tracks](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_Special_Tracks "Final Fantasy VI Special Tracks")_ \- _[Stars Vol.1](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_Stars_Vol.1 "Final Fantasy VI Stars Vol.1")_ \- _[Stars Vol.2](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_Stars_Vol.2 "Final Fantasy VI Stars Vol.2")_ \- _[Music from FFV and FFVI Video Games](/wiki/Music_from_FFV_and_FFVI_Video_Games "Music from FFV and FFVI Video Games")_ \- _[Final Fantasy Finest Box](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_Finest_Box "Final Fantasy Finest Box")_ \- _[Pixel Remaster Original Soundtrack](/wiki/Original_soundtracks_of_Final_Fantasy_VI#Final_Fantasy_VI_Pixel_Remaster_Original_Soundtrack "Original soundtracks of Final Fantasy VI")_  
Musical themes|  "[Battle](/wiki/Battle_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Battle \(Final Fantasy VI\)")" - "[Kefka](/wiki/Kefka_\(theme\) "Kefka \(theme\)")" - "[Phantom Forest](/wiki/Phantom_Forest_\(theme\) "Phantom Forest \(theme\)")" - "[Kids Run Through the City](/wiki/Kids_Run_Through_the_City "Kids Run Through the City")" - "[Celes's Theme](/wiki/Celes%27s_Theme "Celes's Theme")" - "[The Decisive Battle](/wiki/The_Decisive_Battle_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "The Decisive Battle \(Final Fantasy VI\)")" - "[Terra's Theme](/wiki/Terra%27s_Theme "Terra's Theme")" - "[Aria di Mezzo Carattere](/wiki/Aria_di_Mezzo_Carattere "Aria di Mezzo Carattere")" - "[Mog's Theme](/wiki/Moogle%27s_Theme "Moogle's Theme")" - "[Relm's Theme](/wiki/Relm%27s_Theme "Relm's Theme")" - "[Battle to the Death](/wiki/Battle_to_the_Death_\(Final_Fantasy_VI\) "Battle to the Death \(Final Fantasy VI\)")" - "[Searching for Friends](/wiki/Searching_for_Friends "Searching for Friends")" - "[Dancing Mad](/wiki/Dancing_Mad_\(theme\) "Dancing Mad \(theme\)")"  
Guide books|  _[Character Collections](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_Character_Collections "Final Fantasy VI Character Collections")_ (NTT) \- _Bōken Guide Book_ (NTT) \- _[Settei Shiryō-hen‎‎](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_Settei_Shiry%C5%8D-hen "Final Fantasy VI Settei Shiryō-hen")_ (NTT) \- _Kiso Chishiki-hen_ (NTT) \- _Kanzen Kōryaku-hen_ (NTT) \- _[The Complete](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_The_Complete "Final Fantasy VI The Complete")_ (NTT) \- _V Jump Kinkyū Zōkan Kanzen Kōryaku_ \- _[Nintendo Player's Guide](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_III_Nintendo_Player%27s_Guide "Final Fantasy III Nintendo Player's Guide")_ \- _[Players Guide](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_III_Players_Guide "Final Fantasy III Players Guide")_ (Infotainment) \- _[Anthology Official Strategy Guide](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_Anthology_Official_Strategy_Guide "Final Fantasy Anthology Official Strategy Guide")_ (BradyGames) \- _[Advance Official Complete Guide](/wiki/Final_Fantasy_VI_Advance_Official_Complete_Guide "Final Fantasy VI Advance Official Complete Guide")_ (Square Enix) \- _Advance Master Guide_ (V-Jump)  
Other|  _[Figaro no Kekkon: Tales from Desert](/wiki/Figaro_no_Kekkon:_Tales_from_Desert "Figaro no Kekkon: Tales from Desert")_